An Eden In Ancient America? Not Really By William K. Stevens March 30, 1993 The 
New York Times


CONTRARY to widespread belief, evidence is mounting that pre-Columbian America 
was not a pristine wilderness inhabited by people who lived in such harmony with 
nature that they left it unmarked. Instead, many scientists now say, the 
original Americans powerfully transformed their landscape in ways both 
destructive and benign -- just like modern people.

In the latest piece of evidence, British investigators have analyzed sediments 
from Lake Patzcuaro in the highlands of central Mexico and found that ancient 
farming practices around the lake caused "staggeringly high" rates of soil 
erosion, which were unsurpassed even after the Spanish arrived. The study 
"shatters the myth of pre-Columbian America as an Eden in which people were 
'transparent in the landscape,' " Dr. Karl W. Butzer, a geographer at the 
University of Texas, wrote in a commentary on the study in the March 4 issue of 
the British journal Nature.

The question is of more than academic interest, since ancient and traditional 
forms of agriculture have lately been held up as an ideal alternative to 
present-day practices that degrade the landscape. Although some of what ancient 
farmers did was ecologically friendly, much of it was not, scientists warn, and 
great care must be taken in deciding what models to follow.

"It's not true that only in modern times have people begun to abuse the 
environment," said Dr. Daniel J. Hillel, a professor of soil physics at the 
University of Massachusetts. "We're doing it more intensively and on an 
ever-larger scale than before," he said, but he added: "It's wrong to say the 
ancients knew best and that we're stupid. It's also wrong to say that the 
ancients were always stupid."

￼ It is becoming abundantly clear to geographers, ecologists and archeologists 
that, whether for good or ill, ancient people had a heavy and widespread impact 
on their environment. Some scientists are convinced that a number of early 
civilizations were brought down by environmental degradation of the land. The 
brilliant cultural centers of ancient Mesopotamia, for instance, are widely 
thought to have collapsed because of over-irrigation, which forced water tables 
to rise and carry salt to the surface, where it made land unfit for farming. And 
some scientists suggest that erosion brought about by over-clearing of forests 
undermined the Maya of Central America.

In antiquity, as today, people were making decisions aimed at gaining a living 
in the short term without always considering the long-term effects. "People did 
what made sense to them and sometimes that was destructive," said Dr. Charles 
Redman, an anthropologist at Arizona State University. Humans and Evolution

In the Western Hemisphere, pre-Columbian people changed the landscape nearly 
everywhere from the Arctic to Patagonia, according to a 1992 review of the 
literature by Dr. William M. Denevan, a cultural ecologist at the University of 
Wisconsin at Madison.

In some ways, in fact, the pre-European landscape may have owed its essential 
character to humans. When the glaciers retreated from the upper Midwest at the 
end of the last Ice Age, for instance, there was no vegetation at first. But 
humans were there, Dr. Denevan said in an interview, and as grasslands and 
forests returned the Indians shaped the vegetation by setting frequent fires to 
clear land for farming, better hunting, visibility and security. Many 
fire-resistant grasses, flowering plants and trees consequently flourished; the 
ecosystem in effect evolved partly as a result of human action.

While climate plays a major role in shaping ecosystems, Dr. Denevan and others 
argue that the pre-Columbian forests of Eastern North America, for example, were 
more open and park-like as a result of burning than they were in 1750, after the 
Indian population of the Western Hemisphere had been reduced by about 90 percent 
as a result of diseases imported from Europe. The thick primeval forests of 
colonial times, Dr. Denevan argues, represent a recovery from the impact of the 
Indians at their zenith.


In attacking what he calls "the pristine myth," Dr. Denevan's September 1992 
review, published in The Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 
said: "By 1492 Indian activity throughout the Americas had modified forest 
extent and composition, created and expanded grasslands" and rearranged 
topography through "countless artificial earthworks. Agricultural fields were 
common, as were houses and towns and roads and trails. All of these had local 
impacts on soil, microclimate, hydrology and wildlife."

Even mild impacts and slow changes, Dr. Denevan wrote, add up to dramatic 
long-term effects. While the impact was not as extensive as that of modern 
people, he wrote, the paradise that Columbus thought he had found "was clearly a 
humanized paradise." He concluded that pre-Columbian Indians changed the 
landscape more than the Europeans and their descendants did in the 250 years 
after Columbus landed, and in some cases in the 500 years since.

At Lake Patzcuaro west of Mexico City, Dr. Sarah L. O'Hara of the University of 
Sheffield and two British colleagues took 21 core samplings from the lake 
bottom. The lake has no outlet and therefore acts as a trap for sediments that 
have washed into it from surrounding slopes over thousands of years. By 
analyzing the radiocarbon content of charcoal and small animal shells trapped in 
the sediments, the investigators were able to calculate how much sediment was 
deposited in the lake during various periods in the past. Three Periods of Soil 
Erosion

The results published in Nature showed that there had been three distinct 
periods of soil erosion before the Spanish appeared in Mexico, coincident with 
the rise of three early human occupations. The first erosion episode, between 
about 3,900 and 3,250 years ago, was minor. The second, from about 2,600 to 
1,350 years ago, coincided with the classical Mesoamerican civilization of the 
Maya period. The third and most destructive came between A.D. 1200 and the 
arrival of the Spanish in the 16th century, when the land around the lake was 
occupied by a post-classical civilization called the Purepecha, and continued 
thereafter.

It was Dr. O'Ohara who characterized the later pre-Columbian rates of erosion, 
amounting to about 85 tons of soil per acre per year, as "staggeringly high." 
The finding, she said, "explodes this sort of myth that the indigenous peoples 
of central Mexico lived in harmony with the environment and didn't practice 
environmentally damaging agriculture."

While the findings indicate that the arrival of Europeans "was not the watershed 
event in environmental degradation that people make it out to be," Dr. Redman 
said, they make another, perhaps more interesting point as well: that in some 
periods the occupants of the lake watershed pursued more benign practices than 
in others. "There are some centuries where it was better than today and some 
centuries where it was hellacious, where they were stripping the land and 
gullies were forming everywhere," said Dr. Redman.

Methods may make a major difference. Dr. O'Hara attributes the long episodes of 
high erosion partly to classic slash-and-burn agriculture, in which the land is 
denuded of trees to create cropland and erosion often results. But at other 
times and places in ancient America, less damaging methods were employed. These 
include terracing, a practice called agroforestry and the use of what are called 
raised fields.

￼ In one form of agroforestry, still practiced in the Amazon, agricultural plots 
are managed so that over a period of years they evolve in pre-planned phases 
from cleared farmland back into thick forests. The farm plots move through 
stages in which conventional crops predominate at first, but then wild species 
of useful plants and trees are encouraged to encroach gradually. These yield 
medicines and pesticides. Eventually the forest reclaims the plot. Other plots 
are meanwhile in different phases, with the result that the forest continually 
renews itself while sustaining the farmers.

In raised-field technology, employed by ancient peoples from Mexico to Peru, 
crops were grown on rows of end-to-end rectangular platforms, about a yard high, 
created by digging the dirt from areas between the rows. These dug-out areas 
became canals that harbored fish and turtles. Each year silt from the canals was 
placed on the platforms as fertilizer. This environmentally sound and highly 
productive system flourished for thousands of years before mysteriously dying 
out, apparently before the Spanish appeared. But archeologists in Bolivia and 
Peru have resurrected it experimentally, and it has been held up as a low-cost 
alternative to modern agriculture. Demands of Population

Traditional methods like these might well be adapted to local conditions at 
minimum cost and maximum ecological benefit, said Dr. Butzer, who wrote the 
Nature commentary, and in fact are preferable to what he calls 
"technodevelopment" -- the attempt to force high-technology, high-cost 
agriculture on social systems unprepared to use it. But they are not a panacea, 
he said. On slopes steeper than about 5 degrees, for instance, "there is 
virtually nothing you can do" to stop erosion if the slopes are farmed. The 
lesson of the O'Hara study, he said, is that some traditional farming knowledge 
can be "profitably applied, but it has to be applied with care."

There is also a question as to whether the ecologically sound but essentially 
small-scale, labor-intensive traditional methods are adequate to the demands of 
a surging population. Some experts suggest that the Mayan system, for example, 
initially depended on a combination of agroforestry, raised fields and 
terracing, but the Mayan population outgrew these methods and resorted to 
extensive forest clearing that led to erosion.

Dr. O'Harasuggests that the erosion she has documented at Lake Patzcuaro 
resulted simply from too many people trying to live off too little land.

But even that explanation does not universally apply, says Dr. Hillel, because 
"some densely populated societies did live in harmony with the environment, and 
some sparsely populated ones destroyed their environment."
