It's Not the Only Alien Invader By Alan Burdick Nov. 13, 1994 ￼￼The New York 
Times


THREE MORNINGS A WEEK, DANIELLE KITAOKA rises at 3 A.M. and drives the 20 
minutes from her home in Kaneohe, on the island of Oahu, to Honolulu 
International Airport, where she works as an inspector for the Hawaii Department 
of Agriculture. She makes a few calls from her office, then swings by the 
department's dog kennel near the airport to pick up an eager beagle named 
Columbo. Her main task for the day begins promptly at 6 with the arrival from 
Guam of Continental Flight 934.

"I'm on the shift because the other inspector started to burn out," Kitaoka said 
recently as she stood on the Tarmac at the appointed hour, watching the jetliner 
pull up to its gate. A small, freckle-faced woman in her late 20's, Kitaoka did 
not sound pleased at her assignment. "I'm not a morning person," she muttered.

Kitaoka owes her job to an unsettling discovery. At 7:25 A.M. on Sept. 3, 1991, 
workers at Honolulu International found a three-foot brown tree snake, dead with 
its head crushed, on one of the runways. At noon that same day, a second brown 
tree snake was found stunned but alive under a cargo plane that had just landed 
at Hickam Air Force Base, 10 minutes south of Honolulu International. The 
Hawaiian Islands are one of the few tropical locales with no indigenous snakes 
-- no indigenous reptiles of any kind, for that matter, nor any amphibians or 
mammals except a seal and a fruit-eating bat. Both of the brown tree snakes 
discovered that day three years ago had traveled from the same place: the island 
of Guam, 2,500 miles to the west.

The specimens of Boiga irregularis, as the bird-eating brown tree snake is known 
to zoologists, had long been preceded here by reports of the snake's notoriety. 
Guam, wholly free of brown tree snakes a half-century ago, now hosts perhaps a 
million of them. Nine of Guam's 11 native species of forest birds have 
subsequently disappeared; the Guam rail, a flightless bird found nowhere else, 
reigns only from behind the safety of an electrified fence in a rearing compound 
near the Guam airport. Hawaii's own population of flightless birds was wiped out 
years ago: clubbed to death or eaten by rats -- or by the mongooses introduced 
last century in a failed attempt to eradicate the rats. The state's remaining 
birds include 40 percent of those on the United States' endangered species list. 
All are unprepared, evolutionarily speaking, for Boiga irregularis.

Nor are Hawaii's human residents likely to relish an encounter. Hospitals on 
Guam have treated more than 200 brown tree snake victims, many of them infants 
and toddlers bitten while they slept. (The snake's venom, relatively mild to an 
adult, can cause severe pain and swelling in children.) Boiga irregularis also 
displays an irrepressible urge to climb: onto power lines -- causing frequent, 
costly and dispiriting outages on Guam -- and now, apparently, into the wheel 
wells of outbound airplanes.

At the Honolulu airport, four brown tree snakes had been found in the eight 
years prior to 1991, but two in one day set alarm bells ringing. The United 
States Fish and Wildlife Service had already assembled a loose federation of 
volunteers known as the Snake Watch Alert Team -- SWAT -- to report any 
sightings of Boiga irregularis. In July 1992, the State Agriculture Department, 
with a $100,000 Federal grant, acquired three snake-sniffing dogs, trained 
Kitaoka and four other inspectors to handle them and sent them to the gate to 
intercept the invader.

As earplugged men on cargo carts whisked away the contents of Flight 934, 
Kitaoka walked under the nose of the jet, a flashlight in her right hand. "Too 
high for the dogs," she explained, pointing up at the front wheel well. The top 
of the tires reached her chest; the well that held them was another five feet 
overhead. This left Columbo panting in the departmental van parked nearby. 
(Later he'd be driven over to the loading dock for a thorough sniff of the 
place.)

Maybe the batteries were low or maybe the wheel cavity extended too far upward 
-- whatever the reason, Kitaoka couldn't see much beyond a murky tangle of 
hydraulics. She continued the search for several minutes, then repeated the 
ritual at the wheel well under each wing. In 12 months of looking, she has yet 
to encounter a brown tree snake. No member of the SWAT team has seen one yet, 
either.

"I don't really want to find one," Kitaoka said.

I asked her what she'd do if she did.

"Scream." MUCH OF WHAT IS KNOWN ABOUT THE natural comings and goings on Hawaii 
can be found on display or on file at the Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum, a 
12-acre campus of limestone exhibit halls and research offices in the pleated 
foothills north of Honolulu. I stopped by the museum one afternoon to visit with 
Francis Howarth, an entomologist on staff there and one of several scientists on 
Oahu fearfully awaiting some sign of the brown tree snake.

"I've advocated placing a rim of caged chicks around the airport to monitor its 
arrival," Howarth told me as we sat across from each other at an oak table in 
the museum's library. He spoke through a dense white beard, which merged into a 
shock of silver hair atop his head. Burly forearms, laced with scratches earned 
in search of this endangered damselfly or that blind, cave-dwelling cricket, 
rested on the table top.

"We're fouling our nest at several levels," he continued, "and I think the most 
pervasive problem is alien species." Now as never before, he explained, exotic 
plants and creatures are traversing the world, borne on the swelling tide of 
human traffic to places where nature never intended them to be. "The 
introduction of alien species has gone up manyfold because of the ease of 
getting from one place to another," he said. "The situation is getting much, 
much worse."

His concern is widely shared among ecologists today. African killer bees have 
reached California; colonies of South American fire ants have settled in Texas. 
August brought news that Polygonum perfoliatum, a fast-growing vine from Asia, 
is quickly supplanting kudzu as the strangler of the South; it apparently 
arrived as seeds in the root balls of imported rhododendrons.

The most troublesome invader to have reached the United States in recent years 
is the zebra mussel. Native to the Caspian Sea, the striped mussel entered the 
St. Lawrence Seaway in the mid 1980's in ballast water released by a 
transoceanic cargo ship. From there it spread rapidly through the Great Lakes, 
clogging reservoir intake pipes, sinking buoys and slurping up the planktonic 
life that local fish depend upon for nourishment. In 1990, Congress passed the 
Nonindigenous Aquatic Nuisance Prevention and Control Act -- a bramble of task 
forces and requests for funds -- to remedy the situation. Oblivious, larvae of 
the mussel last summer rode the flooded Mississippi by the billions, extending 
their grip as far south as New Orleans.

"Alien species are permanent," Howarth said, clasping his hands. "There's no 
putting the mongoose back in the cage."

The proliferation of exotic species has spawned its own field of biological 
inquiry -- "invasion theory" -- and Howarth is a leading investigator. And for 
better or worse, the Hawaiian archipelago is an ideal laboratory for someone 
with his interests. The dioramas and taxidermed contents of the Bishop Museum 
attest to Hawaii's status as an ecological treasure: more than 90 percent of the 
species found here are utterly unique on earth. Yet according to a 1992 report 
issued by the Nature Conservancy of Hawaii and the Natural Resources Defense 
Council, this ecological Eden is beseiged by a "silent invasion of pest species" 
-- not illegal immigrants or "emerging viruses" but flora and fauna. On average, 
five new plants and 20 species of insect, plus the occasional pathogen and 
predator, are introduced to Hawaii each year, a phenomenon that has led the 
Harvard biologist Edward O. Wilson to pronounce Hawaii "the invasion capital of 
the world."

I'd caught sight of a few infiltrators before I'd met with Howarth, when I'd 
dropped by the Hawaii Department of Agriculture's headquarters in downtown 
Honolulu. The department quarantines or bars entry to several hundred plants and 
creatures deemed agriculturally or ecologically perilous to the state. 
Consequently, Kitaoka and her colleagues devote most days to spot-checking the 
millions of baggage-laden visitors and the many more parcels, express mail 
packages and shipments of flowers and rutabagas and oysters that pass through 
Honolulu each year. Two weeks earlier, Columbo, the beagle, had caught an odd 
scent from an unlabeled box at the Federal Express office. Inside, wrapped in 
newspaper, were a dozen Tokay geckos being smuggled in as pets.

I found the geckos, bleached and embalmed in a jar of formaldehyde, on display 
in the lobby of the headquarters. Curled in an adjacent jar, looking more pallid 
than brown, were the tree snakes found in 1991. A nearby storeroom, filled with 
glass tanks and plastic cages, held more recent captures: electric eels, 
snapping turtles, iguanas, chameleons, scorpions, hamsters -- seized from 
suitcases and shoeboxes and Tupperware dishes. Imported illegally as pets, 
creatures like these are often set free on Hawaii when their owners tire of 
them. In the last decade, some 20 species of freshwater fish, including piranha, 
have taken up residence in Hawaiian streams in this manner.

Most of the concern about invading plants and creatures has focused on their 
economic impact. In September 1993, in a hefty report titled "Harmful 
Non-Indigenous Species in the United States," the Congressional Office of 
Technology Assessment estimated that between 1906 and 1991 the 79 most harmful 
exotic species to enter the United States -- among them the gypsy moth and the 
Mediterranean fruit fly -- cost the nation $97 billion in crop damage and 
pest-control efforts. The agriculture industry in Hawaii loses millions of 
dollars each year to alien pests like the sugar-cane aphid, which was 
accidentally imported a few years ago in a shipment of golf course sod.

But something less easily quantified -- though ultimately more crucial -- is at 
stake, as Howarth sees it. With plants and animals moving more readily from 
place to place, an increasing number of native species -- residents of the 
planet's ecological backwaters, unable to compete with zoology's rising 
cosmopolitan class -- are being pushed out of existence. Howarth suspects that 
"a lot, if not the majority, of extinctions from habitat destruction is from 
alien species introductions."

It is a new era, wherein the greatest threat to biological diversity may no 
longer be bulldozers or pesticides but, in a sense, nature itself: carried in 
the valises of businessmen, hidden in the orchids sent on Mother's Day, lurking 
in the landing gear of an airliner.

THE AIRPORT SHUTTLE DRIVER IN Honolulu laughed when I told him I was headed for 
Guam. "Watch out for snakes," he said.

An overnight flight across the dateline from Hawaii brings the visitor to the 
United States territory of Guam: 9 miles wide, 30 miles long and one of the 
world's more unusual cultural cauldrons. The northern end of the island, a 
jungly limestone plateau, is owned largely by the United States military, which 
wrested Guam from the Japanese in 1944. Most native Guamanians inhabit the lush 
volcanic hills and small, palm-fringed towns of the island's southern end. The 
midsection of Guam is common ground to both populations: strip malls, fast-food 
joints and traffic jams, although it is also home to a burgeoning resort 
industry, much of it Japanese-owned.

The first brown tree snake arrived on the island sometime in the late 1940's. 
Most biologists believe it came from one of the Admiralty Islands, near New 
Guinea, coiled in the dashboard of a jeep or in some other salvaged bit of 
wartime junk. Prior to that fateful arrival, the only snake on the island had 
been Rhamphotyphlops braminus, a blind and wriggling creature closer in size and 
spirit to a worm. Hence the early reports of the brown tree snake treated its 
arrival with benign curiosity. "Because they eat small pests and are not 
dangerous to man," The Guam Daily News reported in October 1965, alongside a 
photo of a seven-foot snake killed at the United Seamen's Service Center, "they 
may be considered beneficial to the island." Several equally large specimens 
were remarked upon in the local press in ensuing years, including one that a 
Mrs. Edith Smith found slipping across her neck at 4 o'clock one morning in June 
1966.

Tales of the snake's exploits have since reached hysterical proportions. There 
is the snake that crawled in through the sink; the snake that materialized in 
the toilet while a dinner party hostess sat (briefly) on it; the snake that 
jumped from an automobile air-conditioning vent and sent the driver into a 
near-fatal swerve. According to a story published in The Wall Street Journal in 
1991, the snakes "hang from trees like fat, brown strands of cooked spaghetti." 
But I didn't see that. A search of my hotel grounds that first morning revealed 
no snakes. None lurked in the grass island of the Taco Bell parking lot down the 
road. The closest I came was a local man who said he'd once found a snake 
burrowing into the nose of his pet goat, which subsequently died. "And you know, 
the color isn't brown," he added excitedly. "It's blue!"

I was baffled until I spoke one afternoon with Earl Campbell, Guam's resident 
herpetologist. An athletic but graying doctoral student from Ohio State 
University, Campbell conducts several research projects devoted to deciphering 
the habits of the brown tree snake. (Funds and supervision are provided by the 
National Biological Survey, a division of the Department of the Interior.) We 
met near Ritidian Point, the northernmost tip of Guam, in a thick and rather 
scruffy swath of forest where Campbell conducts his fieldwork. Right off, I 
recounted my futile search for Boiga irregularis.

"Many of my friends have lived on Guam for years and never seen snakes," 
Campbell reassured me. "The snakes are extremely averse to light. During the day 
they take cover in places where people aren't likely to encounter them."

After we'd chatted for a while, he suggested that if I wanted to see a snake -- 
or improve my odds of seeing one -- I come back the following evening. I took 
him up on his offer, returning the next night to find Campbell, dressed in a 
T-shirt, shorts and sandals, putting on a miner's helmet. He flicked on his 
headlamp and led me down a narrow path shrouded in foliage. Vines dangled from 
overhead.

"Looking for a snake in the forest is sort of like being in a demented 'Where's 
Waldo?' book," Campbell said, scanning the gnarled branches. Although the brown 
tree snake has been known to grow as long as 10 feet, most are no more than a 
yard long and thin as a pinky. Add to this the fact that it is a master climber, 
strong enough to stand virtually upright on its prehensile tail, and what you 
have is a supremely surreptitious creature. It will consume anything that smells 
of blood, from dog food and soiled tampons to semicooked spareribs and raw 
hamburger -- even the foam plate that the hamburger comes on. With its flexible 
jaw, the snake can devour creatures more than half its own weight, a category 
that has come to include live poultry and at least one Labrador retreiver puppy.

"It's incredible how well the brown tree snake does on Guam," Campbell marveled 
as we crept first down one path, then another, then another. "My average here is 
one an hour." When I sounded unimpressed, Campbell noted that this patch of 
jungle contained the highest density of brown tree snakes -- of any kind of 
snake, for that matter -- anywhere in the world. "In the Amazon," he said, 
"where there are maybe a dozen species of snake, people search for 12 hours to 
find one snake at night."

By 10 o'clock, the heat of the day had dissolved and the humidity began to 
condense around us. Spider webs choked the trail and a symphony of katydids 
chirred from everywhere and nowhere at once. Yet I soon realized that the aura 
had been even more sepulchral when I'd visited on the previous afternoon, in 
daylight: there had been no sound but for passing wasps and the drone of an 
overhead plane. It struck me that, even after several days on the island, I 
could count on one hand the number of birds I'd seen: one turtledove -- a 
species that immigrated from the Philippines several years ago -- and a few 
bedraggled European sparrows that stuck close by the hotel. The silence I'd been 
hearing was the absence of birdsong.

The effect was unsettling: a creature apparent only by the absence of any life 
surrounding it. No wonder Hawaiians are concerned, I thought. It was only 11 
years ago, more than three decades after the snake immigrated to Guam, that 
ecologists were able to rule out pesticides and habitat destruction as the cause 
of their island's silent spring. By the time Hawaiians know for certain whether 
the brown tree snake is among them, the damage will be done.

MY BEST VIEW OF A BROWN TREE SNAKE CAME the following afternoon near the Guam 
International Airport. I had joined Thomas Hall, a stocky, upbeat fellow who 
runs the Animal Damage Control division of the United States Department of 
Agriculture on Guam. In his case, "damage control" means making sure the brown 
tree snake does not leave the island. It is a daunting task. Along with the busy 
commercial airport, Guam is home to a Navy air base, a commercial and a naval 
shipping port and an Air Force base. All require inspection by Hall or members 
of his crew, which includes 13 employees and two Jack Russell terriers.

"Detector dogs have caught several snakes," Hall told me as we circled the 
commercial and naval runways, which lie alongside each other in the center of 
Guam, in his red Isuzu Trooper. "Once, these pallets of bombs were being loaded 
up to go to San Diego through Hawaii and the dogs pulled a snake right out of 
the middle of the pallet. There's no way anyone would have seen it. The same 
thing with cars. We had some being loaded one morning down at Navy, going to 
Hawaii. The dogs pulled a snake out of the power steering unit. We caught one 
just the other day near an airplane. She had eight eggs in her."

We drove past hangars, cargo docks and boxy military apartments. Hall parked 
near a dense thicket -- beloved by brown tree snakes, he said -- that would soon 
be cleared away.

"Right now, our goal is to make the ports snake-free," he said, wading into the 
brush. His current strategy is to cast a wide net of snake traps around the 
ports and to check them regularly. Hall lifted a branch to reveal one of the 
specially designed traps, which looked like two wire-mesh wastebaskets attached 
at their rims. The bait was a live white mouse, safely ensconced in a tiny wire 
cabin with a week's worth of diced potato. Federally supported researchers in 
Colorado and Oregon are busily experimenting with various chemical cues and 
sexual pheremones in the hopes of one day replacing the mouse with a synthetic, 
and less costly, lure. Any permanent solution -- there is a Federally financed 
plot taking shape to infect the snake with the serpentine equivalent of 
pneumonia, for example -- is still years from fruition.

In the meantime, it is up to Hall to keep Hawaii and other places safe from 
brown tree snakes. "It'll be a long time before every snake is stopped from 
going off island," he said as we forged through the brush. But even one snake is 
enough. Boiga irregularis can survive for months on no food and little water, 
and females can produce fertile eggs for up to seven years after mating. Already 
the island of Saipan, 150 miles to the north, reports some six snake sightings a 
year, indicating a firmly entrenched population.

Hall thrashed onward, checking trap after trap -- and coming up empty. Finally, 
eager to demonstrate his effectiveness, Hall led me to a clearing under a large 
tree. A trunk-size wire cage sat on the ground. Inside, in a writhing tangle, 
were at least a dozen snakes. "We make sure we have some on hand for research," 
Hall explained.

A large one lunged at us, mouth agape, as we approached the cage, then struggled 
to free its fangs from the mesh. Hall lifted the lid and plucked it out with a 
pair of long metal tongs. He let it dangle by its neck for a moment, six feet of 
pure muscle coiling and uncoiling in midair. Its skin was neither brown nor 
blue, I noticed, but a murky green, like grass in Manhattan; its underside was 
yellow. Then Hall handed the snake to me. At his instruction, I placed my thumb 
on a bony ridge at the base of the skull and, pressing down gently, clamped the 
jaw safely shut against my forefinger. The rest of the snake immediately began 
to wreathe itself around my forearm and neck, squeezing with a gentle, almost 
clinical indifference, like the blood pressure gauge in a doctor's office. As 
the tip of the snake's tail probed my right ear, I lifted its pebbly head for a 
closer look -- hoping to catch a glimmer of intent. But its eyes were tiny 
yellow beads, slit vertically like a cat's and far more impenetrable.

Late on my last night on Guam, I looked out my hotel window and beheld a more 
sinister manifestation of Boiga irregularis: utter darkness. No street lamps, no 
porch lights, no glaring strip malls, only a few pairs of headlights streaming 
down Guam's blackened main boulevard. According to a television news report the 
following morning, two brown tree snakes had crawled onto the power lines at the 
south end of Guam, cutting electricity to the entire island. It was the latest 
of the roughly 1,200 outages snakes have caused since 1978.

On hearing the news, I hurried over to the Guam Power Authority's headquarters, 
a squat building along congested Marine Drive. The press officer agreed to show 
me the culprits. She returned from her office with a pizza box, which she 
flipped open. There they were: two snakes, each roughly three feet long. The 
true color of their skin was now virtually impossible to discern, since it had 
turned mostly black from the high voltage and in some places was flayed off 
altogether.

KILAUEA CRATER, A STRAIGHT-WALLED basin nearly 3 miles wide and 500 feet deep, 
is situated several thousand feet up the eastern flank of Mauna Loa, on the 
island of Hawaii. Sulfurous clouds pipe from the crater floor, a vast and 
rumpled plain of black lava crust. Directly below this surface lies the engine 
of the Hawaiian archipelago. Molten earth, issuing from a vent in the sea bed 
miles down, pushes the Big Island an inch higher each year. And each year the 
island drifts a little farther from its fuse -- carried west on the Pacific 
tectonic plate until one day, eons of erosion from now, it and Maui, Molokai, 
Oahu and the older members of the chain will subside beneath the waves, even as 
new islands blossom in their place.

The wondrous products of this brief geological moment can be found in Hawaii 
Volcanoes National Park, which unfolds for several miles around Kilauea. The 
rain forests, woodlands and lava flows here are home to the most extensive 
remnants of the archipelago's native flora and fauna, including the red, 
slender-billed i'iwi, one of the 47 species of honeycreeper that evolved from a 
mainland finch blown to the islands eons ago, and a colorful array of lobeliads, 
whose long-throated blossoms can be pollinated only by native birds. Also in 
residence are hundreds of biological aliens. A few, like the Polynesian rat, 
arrived with the first Hawaiians 1,500 years ago, but the rate of encroachment 
has risen steadily since Captain Cook's landing in Hawaii in 1778.

"The early Hawaiians altered the lowlands considerably," Linda Pratt, a veteran 
National Biological Survey botanist, told me one morning as she showed me around 
the park, pointing out its astonishing -- and imperiled -- biological diversity. 
"But they had virtually no impact on these upland systems. What we're looking at 
today is 200 years of change, very recent in biological terms."

We stood in a bright patch of forest, the stout trunks of native koa and 
soapberry trees -- some of them several centuries old, Pratt said -- rising 
dozens of feet straight up around us. Pratt's excitement flashed through her 
large round eyeglasses, which lent her a certain schoolteacherish charm. We'd 
been joined by David Foote, a National Biological Survey entomologist, and both 
he and Pratt wore blue raincoats as well as black, knee-high rubber boots that 
they would wash upon returning to the park supply trailer. "We regularly clean 
our boots off," Pratt said, "so that we don't carry any nasty alien seeds into 
the native forest."

More than the ancient beauty of the spot, what impressed me was the racket. All 
manner of avian twitter, warble, whistle and chirrup cascaded from the canopy, 
as though every native bird in the state had materialized overhead, safe from 
foreign invaders like the brown tree snake. Pratt cocked an ear to the din, then 
smiled ruefully. It turned out I'd been marveling at aliens.

"That's either a Japanese white-eye or a European house finch," she said, 
looking up and to her left. She jabbed her thumb in the opposite direction. "And 
that's a cardinal over there. That's what gives New England forests their 
distinctive summer sound. Unlike the alien insects and plants, the vast majority 
of alien birds were intentionally introduced here. There was a private group of 
bird lovers called A'hui Manu -- the Bird Group, in Hawaiian -- and they 
introduced yellowfern canaries, saffron finches, laughter waxbills, cardinals. 
They wanted to see these beautiful songbirds flying around."

The problem with this arrangement, Pratt explained, is that the alien birds feed 
on the fruits of alien plants and spread their seeds throughout the lowlands -- 
and, increasingly, in the park. Park managers are currently waging a fierce 
battle against Myrica faya, an ornamental tree from the Azores that was imported 
in the 1940's, perhaps by lowland gardeners, and whose berries are cherished by 
house finches and Japanese white-eyes. In the wild, Myrica faya quickly forms 
tight stands -- thereby depriving native plants of light -- and enriches the 
soil with nitrogen, enabling other alien plants to take root in the otherwise 
uninviting volcanic substrate.

I asked about the fate of native birds and Pratt listed their enemies: rats, 
mongooses, iguanas, none of which evolved on Hawaii. Avian malaria is a 
relatively new problem, she added. Alien birds are primary carriers of the 
disease and are largely immune to it. Mosquitoes -- inadvertently brought to 
Hawaii in larval form during the 19th century in the water casks of Mexican 
ships -- transmit it to the native birds, which succumb in shivering masses, 
recalling the somber 19th-century proverb that echoed through the Hawaiian towns 
emptied by European epidemics: "Native death takes few at a time; the 
foreigners' death takes many."

And as go the birds, Pratt continued, so go the flora. "Some of the native 
lobeliads have long curved flowers, like the beaks of honeycreepers," she said. 
"It may well be that one reason for the extreme rarity of some of these plants 
is that they aren't being pollinated anymore."

In 1958, in his ground-breaking study, "The Ecology of Invasions of Animals and 
Plants," the biologist Charles S. Elton characterized an invader as "working his 
way somehow into a complex system, rather as an immigrant might try to find a 
job and a house and start a new family in a new country or big city." What Pratt 
and Foote were showing me was, in effect, a neighborhood in transition. Not 
every newcomer is a threat, Pratt said. Of the 600 species of alien plants in 
the park, most are botanically unable to spread and will be ignored by park 
managers. But a few invaders are irksome keystones: consuming or outcompeting 
the native residents, setting the stage for new invasions, until a new, alien 
network of ecological alliances forms and the old neighborhood is supplanted 
altogether.

Foote, a precise, soft-spoken man with hazel eyes and curly blond hair, 
suggested we drive his Range Rover to a different area of the park for a better 
view of the damage wrought by invaders. We parked along a misty, forest-lined 
road, then he led us down an embankment and into rain forest. Centuries-old 
hapu'u ferns, bearded with moss, fountained up tall and thick as trees. A black, 
fermenting humus sucked at our boots with every step. Pratt walked to where a 
fern trunk lay across the path -- pushed over, she said, by feral pigs. Pigs 
were introduced to the islands by the first Polynesian settlers, but the 
troublemakers running rampant today in the forest, Pratt said, are an entirely 
different breed, descended from the herds set loose by Captain Cook.


"These pigs weigh 200 pounds or more," she explained. "And they're perfectly 
capable of pushing a tree down. Then they rip 'em open -- they've got big teeth 
and tusks. The inside core is pure starch and the pigs hollow it out. About 90 
percent of the time they kill the tree. Given enough time, they can completely 
destroy the forest. The native plants are adapted to low light levels, and the 
pig removes the ferns that keep the shade high and the invading plants out."

The native organisms, Pratt added, "aren't weak in any way. They're very well 
adapted to the conditions here." Yet, as she went on to explain, students of 
biological invasion have learned that island species, having evolved in 
isolation of ungulates and most predators, are particularly vulnerable to 
encroachment. Many Hawaiian birds lack the instincts to protect themselves from 
rodents and reptiles. (On Guam, the ground-dwelling birds were easy prey for the 
brown tree snake, while introduced birds like the Philippine turtledove, which 
tend to be more wily and reproduce faster, have fared better.) Similarly, many 
Hawaiian plants evolved without the defenses -- nettles, thorns, a toxic flavor, 
a hardy stem -- that enable their mainland relatives to ward off grazers and 
survive repeated tramplings. Finally, island populations are typically small and 
thus more likely to be obliterated by a single catastrophe -- hurricane, 
disease, invading snake.

Pratt bent closer to the fallen trunk, pointing to where the core had been 
gouged out. A small pool of stagnant water had formed -- ideal breeding grounds, 
she said, for the malarial mosquito.

"Even in these wet forests, it's otherwise hard for mosquitoes to find water to 
breed in," she said. Now the feral pig had created a foothold for the insects. 
"So everything is connected," Pratt sighed. "As is always the case. Screw up one 
thing and it has far-reaching consequences."

Standing there in the rain forest, at the muddy front in the battle against 
invading flora and fauna, Pratt had hit upon the frustration at the very core of 
invasion theory. Although ecologists would like nothing more than to predict 
which organisms will turn out to be successful invaders and which ones will not, 
their inquiry relies entirely on hindsight. An invader that can be studied is by 
definition one that has successfully gotten a foothold. The vast majority of 
invasions that fail, and the lessons that might be drawn from such failures, 
disappear without a trace.

For the moment, managers of Hawaii Volcanoes National Park must contend with the 
aliens already in residence, an effort that costs about $1 million in Federal 
funds annually. Several times a week, a crew of four employees dressed in white 
jump suits ventures into regions of the park that biologists have deemed 
especially rich in species; there, they aim machetes and squirt bottles of 
herbicide at the dozen most troublesome invasive plants. Another crew is 
responsible for erecting wire fences and eliminating feral pigs.

As it turns out, $1 million is a relatively modest amount in the war against 
alien species. Florida, which also boasts a semitropical climate and a diverse 
cache of endemic organisms, spends $5 million annually fighting hydrilla, an 
aquarium plant from Sri Lanka that was dumped into a canal around 1951 and has 
since emerged as a sort of underwater kudzu, choking some 75,000 acres of 
waterway. Everglades National Park spends $500,000 a year eradicating three 
fast-growing alien trees -- Australian pine, melaleuca and Brazilian pepper -- 
that crowd out native plants and the creatures that depend on them.

Still, my concept of Eden had not allowed for exterminators. Was the park 
preserving nature here or running an oversized "natural" garden? I put the 
question to Foote and Pratt.

"It's a world apart from an arboretum or a zoo," Foote responded after a 
moment's reflection. "Here, you have a functioning ecosystem that requires very 
little in the way of manipulation. We're not feeding the birds. We're not 
planting the plants. The insects that pollinate the plants serve as food for the 
birds and reproduce on their own. The only thing we do is keep out aliens. Once 
you get an alien species under control, it requires very little effort to keep 
it in check."

Pratt nodded. "If this forest is undergoing natural succession and is 
self-sustaining, then I think it's natural," she said. "The only thing that 
isn't self-sustaining is if we allowed the aliens to take over."

Yet what exactly is unnatural about alien species? After all, Hawaii's unique 
life forms evolved entirely from ancient colonists: a wayward finch, a spider 
that floated in from the mainland, a snail or a tick or a burr that dropped from 
the down of a roving sea bird. The question of what is native has lately become 
a heated one in Hawaii. When the Nature Conservancy began two years ago to 
remove feral pigs from its land on the island of Molokai, local hunters decried 
the effort as "eco-imperialistic," noting that the pig is a sacred element of 
the Hawaiian diet and culture. "To eradicate the pig," one native Hawaiian 
teacher said last year in a radio interview, "is like eradicating us." People 
for the Ethical Treatment of Animals has stoked the confusion and resentment. 
"When animals who have been in Hawaii for 1,500 years don't behave precisely as 
the Nature Conservancy would like," one of its news releases declared, " 
'diversity of life' becomes 'alien species.' "

Like most biologists in the state, Foote was familiar with the charged debate 
surrounding the question of what constitutes "native" and he expressed his 
thoughts with some reluctance, as if not wanting to give offense. "Many of the 
species that evolved on Hawaii have a lineage that can be traced back beyond the 
age of the oldest islands here," he finally said. "So we're talking about a 
heritage that goes back more than five million years. The entire chain of 
islands can be dated back more than 50 million years. Some groups of plants and 
insects have been island-hopping over that entire time period. To contrast that 
with an organism that was introduced in the last 1,500 years -- to say it's as 
native as these endemic insects and plants -- is just absurd."

The mist thickened into drizzle as we headed back toward the road, continuing 
the conversation. "Things will always be arriving," Pratt said at one point. 
"But the key element is the time frame. Even if all the people disappeared from 
the planet tomorrow, there will still be plant and animal introductions into 
Hawaii -- say one every 20,000 years. But the current rate is hundreds per year. 
Of those, maybe only one -- or none -- could possibly have gotten here on their 
own. To me that makes a huge difference.

"A few years ago, we had a group of kids from Great Britain working here, 
removing alien plants. And they couldn't really understand what we were doing: 
'Why are you worried about these plants? Humans brought them here; humans are 
natural; therefore the invasion of alien plants is natural.' I tried to explain 
what our viewpoint was. Afterward, I came to feel that they couldn't understand 
it because they had grown up in Great Britain, where everything they looked at 
had been changed by humans thousands of years ago -- so long ago that these kids 
think it's normal."

ONE EVENING FOOTE invited me to his home for dinner. The house is a modest, 
rather rustic affair, as is just about everything in the small village of 
Volcano. A tall row of trees obscures his neighbors; a gravel road runs past. 
Foote lives here with his wife, Karin, a chemistry student at the local 
university, and two jittery dogs: Homer, so named for the three owners he'd 
passed through before Foote acquired him, and Sed.

"That's an acronym for Someone Else's Dog," Foote smiled.

He offered me a beer, then showed me a large gray moth he'd captured at his 
porch lamp the night before. In caterpillar form, Eupithecia monticolens thrives 
on the pollen of o'hia blossoms and the protein therein -- an unusual 
evolutionary adaptation, Foote said, since most caterpillars eat only foliage.

"The moths are attracted to lights," he added. "Residents of Volcano say that 
Eupithecia monticolens used to blanket the windows at night. Now you're lucky if 
you see one or two. Their decline seems directly related to the introduction of 
yellow jackets, which pluck them right off the o'hia blossoms. It's really 
dramatic to see. The yellow jackets first showed up in Hawaii around 1978 in a 
shipment of Christmas trees and they feed on a wide variety of insects. 
Unfortunately, they're reducing the amount of food for forest birds. The 
caterpillar is a primary prey item for three endangered passerines that are all 
missing now from the park."

Foote added that Eupithecia monticolens is thought to be the evolutionary 
precursor of 22 known species of Eupithecia caterpillar in Hawaii. Some of them 
are quite unusual, he said, and he suggested I stop by the park's lab the 
following day and have a look.

We met next morning in a small white room with metal stools and a row of 
microscopes on a counter along one wall. A bank of windows looked out onto the 
cluster of drab wooden buildings that make up the park's headquarters. Foote 
handed me a glass vial; stoppered inside was a slim leaf. On it, an inchworm sat 
erect: its hind end fastened to the stem by tiny legs and its segmented body 
sloping skyward, like a miniature leaf-green escalator. This is Eupithecia 
orichloris. How long ago it evolved into its own species is unclear, Foote said, 
since the Eupethecia genus was discovered only in 1978 and "there's no molecular 
phylogeny to tell how old it is." Nonetheless, Eupithecia orichloris has 
retained its ancestor's taste for protein. In fact, it and a half-dozen of its 
kin have taken this legacy to the extreme, Foote said. They are the world's only 
known carnivorous inchworms.

I watched with fascination as Foote shooed several ordinary fruit flies from a 
holding vial into the proverbial lion's den. The inchworm stood twig-still as 
they settled in. After a few minutes, a fly wandered into one of several 
sensitive hairs protruding from the hind end. Instantly, the inchworm struck, 
reaching over backward and nabbing its prey with -- I was watching now through a 
microscope -- two sets of clawlike legs. These immobilized the fly while the 
mandibles of Eupithecia began to graze: first on the tail, then the thorax, the 
wings, the still-wriggling legs -- until all that was left after 15 minutes were 
two amber geodesic eyes. Then these, too, were punctured and devoured. 
Eupithecia paused a moment, then stiffened in anticipation of its next meal.

I was riveted to the scene: Eupithecia lashing again and again, victim after 
victim reduced to a bolus dimly visible through its skin. Like the brown tree 
snake, the predatory caterpillars have adopted a surreptitious life style. One 
is gray and spiny like the decayed perches it favors; another is ornamented with 
tubercles resembling moss. One stations itself along the edge of koa leaves; 
another chews out the midrib of hapu'u fronds and lies there in ambush. And like 
the native birds that feed on them, Foote said, these Eupithecia are inching 
toward oblivion.

"Their prey are disappearing," he said. "Two species of fruit fly that they feed 
on are disappearing from the park."

It was as though the face of a watch had been suddenly pried off and the inner 
workings revealed. Hawaii's native birds, dim flickers on the radar of human 
awareness, face consumption at the jaws of an invading snake that is all but 
invisible to them and us. Yet extinction already threatens the birds from below 
-- a slow starvation imposed indirectly by alien yellow jackets, mosquitoes, 
pigs and songbirds that are well established here.

The French anthropologist Claude Levi-Strauss lamented, at the start of the jet 
age, that the variety of human cultures is dissolving into uniformity. 
"Civilization has ceased to be that delicate flower which was preserved and 
painstakingly cultivated in one or two sheltered areas of a soil rich in wild 
species," he wrote in 1955. "Mankind has opted for monoculture; it is in the 
process of creating a mass civilization, as beetroot is grown in the mass."

As a direct consequence, a similar form of homogenization is now threating 
ecological cultures. As the human race spreads and its sphere of disruption 
widens, the natural world is winnowed only to those plants and creatures that 
can thrive in our wake. In effect, human civilization, history's most pervasive 
invader, has become a force of natural selection in its own right.

When I raised this notion with Foote, he nodded and replied: "We are 
increasingly dealing with a number of species that are associated with humans 
throughout the world. If that's what you want to live with -- a small suite of a 
dozen, maybe two dozen species -- then you can live with that, I suppose."

"HOW DO YOU PROVE TO people there's a problem," Earl Campbell had said at one 
point during our snake hunt on Guam, "if it's something they can't see?"

That is precisely the challenge ecologists face in the defense against 
biological invaders. Of the few government regulations that deal expressly with 
alien species -- including the Lacey Act, the main Federal law controlling the 
transportation of fish and wildlife, and the Federal Noxious Weed Act -- most 
take what's known as a "dirty list" approach: they bar entry to certain 
"injurious" foreign organisms and allow unlisted ones to be imported. 
Unfortunately, such listsare usually short and uncomprehensive. According to an 
Office of Technology Assessment report issued last year, "most of the world's 
fauna, excluding insects . . . could be legally imported into the United 
States." The approach is also inherently reactive. New species typically aren't 
added to the lists until their invasiveness is well proved -- overlooking the 
fact that most invaders are, like cockroaches, best dealt with before their 
presence is widely apparent.

For Hawaiians, however, even an invisible Boiga irregularis has become a sort of 
rallying point for their alien pest program. The State Department of Agriculture 
has stepped up its demand to inspect incoming first-class mail, which often 
contains contraband plants and insects. (The United States Department of 
Agriculture long ago won the right to inspect first-class mail leaving Hawaii 
for the mainland, but the state has not yet won equivalent access.)

The Nature Conservancy of Hawaii and the Natural Resources Defense Council have 
begun to coordinate the state's defense against invaders, pressing for stiffer 
penalties and urging the numerous agencies involved -- the Federal and military 
customs services, Fish and Wildlife, the Department of Health, the Hawaii Farm 
Bureau, among others -- to share information about inspection strategies and 
incoming aliens. The challenge is how to protect a state more ecologically rich 
than the Galapagos Islands without demanding that tourists set no more than 
their eyes on shore.

"How do we remain the hub of the Pacific," asks Alan Holt, science director of 
the Nature Conservancy of Hawaii, "yet also maintain the value that isolation 
brings?"

In a larger sense, that has been the predicament from the start. Humans are by 
nature exploratory beings, determined to breach the barriers that isolate us 
from the rest of the world. Yet our habit of travel is inherently detrimental to 
the ecological islands in our path, which cannot maintain the pace of cultural 
change. One might ask: So what? Paradise, that mythical plot of nature immune 
from human influence, was lost to us the moment we stepped into it eons ago. The 
ecological clock is destined to wind down. Why try to halt the inevitable?

"There's a loss of the features that allow you to describe where you live, where 
you're from," Earl Campbell had said when I posed this question to him. 
"Language is becoming homogenized. Foods are becoming homogenized. The things 
people do or see are becoming homogenized too. When you characterize where 
you're from, you look out your window at the plants and animals, even if you 
don't notice them immediately. I think there's something terribly wrong with the 
loss of a distinct sense of being. It comes down to: Where is my home?"

Arthur Medeiros, a biologist on Maui, agrees. "It's analgous to culture," he 
told me one afternoon in a restaurant at the foot of Haleakala, Maui's 
10,000-foot extinct volcano. "Where do we stop this homogenization? We degrade 
the world unnecessarily if we ignore the small steps that come with keeping 
pockets regional."

A wiry man of Portuguese descent, Medeiros works in the volcano's crater at 
Haleakala National Park, the other main bastion of native flora and fauna in the 
state. And Haleakala is equally beseiged by invading species, a situation likely 
to worsen, Medeiros said, if plans are approved to open Maui's airport -- just 
20 miles upwind of the park -- to international traffic.

A local teen-ager wandered up to our table, offering to sell a Jackson's 
chameleon for $20. Three of the beasts sat on his shoulder -- horned, 
swivel-eyed lizards from East Africa that have become a popular pet item on 
Hawaii and a potential threat to native birds and insects. Medeiros waved him 
off and returned to explaining his other activities: mediating the pig 
controversy and giving nature lectures at a nearby community college. If the 
threat of alien species is at heart a threat to our sense of self and home, 
Medeiros intends to make sure that Hawaiians fully understand their ecological 
legacy.

"Everything's happening fast here -- a deterioration of the natural resources, 
an appreciation of the culture," he said. "At some point, the culture is going 
to grab onto the resources and say: 'How can we be Hawaiians if the place 
doesn't look like Hawaii? If all the plants and animals are gone, why don't we 
just resuscitate the Hawaiian culture in San Jose, Calif.?' "

He paused for a moment, then stretched his arms wide and, still seated, began 
flapping them. Suddenly, and for a very brief moment, there issued from his 
mouth a shrill warble, like steam escaping: a perfect imitation of a thousand 
birds shrieking out a dawn chorus.

"I like a noisy forest," Medeiros said, letting his arms drop. "I'd like 
Hawaiians to hear that."

